---
layout: post
title: "12 Rules of Life By Jordan Peterson"
subtitle: "Book Summary"
date: 2022-08-31 12:42
---
<h2>RULE 1 / Stand up straight with your shoulders back</h2>
J.P gives a evolutionary explanation about how the lobsters who display the most power are the ones who live the longest, mate more, and live better overall. The opposite is true for the weak lobsters. The lobsters who win will go on displaying their confidence and can easily scare away the weak lobsters without even having to flex their strength. The weak lobsters remember their losses and reshape their brain and posture as if they are now ‘loser’ lobsters. Human are no different. People like lobsters, size each other up. 
“There are many system of interactions between brain, body, and social world that can get caught in a positive feedback loop. Depressed people, can start feeling useless and burdensome,as well as grief stricken and pained. This makes them withdraw contact from friends and family. Then the withdrawl makes them more lonesome and isolated, and more likely to feel useless and burdensome. They then withdraw more. In this manner, depression spirals and amplifies.”
The damage done by bullying can continue into the future. In complex cases, a habitual assumption of subordination renders the person more stressed and uncertain than is necessary, and their habitually submissive posturing continues to attract genuine negative attention from the ‘bullies’ in life. 
“Self-protective, anger can be necessary to defend one-self. If you can bite you generally do not have to. When skillfully integrated, the ability to respond with aggression and violence decreases rather than increases the probability that actual aggression will become necessary. I you say no early in the cycle of oppression, then the scope for oppression on the part of the oppressor will remain properly bounded and limited… People who refuse to muster appropriately self-protective terriotorial responses are laid open to exploitation as much as those who genuinely cannot stand up for their own rights because of a more essential inability or a true imbalance of power”

 Psychology Today ‘How to stand up for yourself’: “Focusing on goals set you up with a good story when you need to say no: ‘ I can’t house-sit while your away because I’m committed to finishing up my project”.  Choosing what to do and when to pass on a requet comes from having a clear sense of your larger priorities and near-term task goals. If you do not have clarity on what matters to you, and what you need to do to make progress on that, then it is easier for someone else to claim some of your time on a task you’d rather not do.
	“a linguistic cue that can reframe situations: if you say I don’t eat chocolate cake, it is impowering. If you say I can’t eat chocolate cake, you are implying that you are not in control and that external factors drive you. It boils down to setting a personal policy, implementing it, and communicating it with others. Think deeply about the things that matter to you, then give voice and action to your values. If someone asks you for money, your rejection will be less damaging of it’s not personal: ‘I don’t lend money to anyone, as a rule”. 
“Naïve harmless people usually guide their perceptions and actions with a few simple axioms: people are basically good, and no one really wants to hurt anyone else. These naïve beliefs can become a positive invitation to abuse. “ Such scenarios build up resent within the individual…. When the wakening occurs- when once naïve people recgonize within themselves the seeds of evil and monstrosity, and see themselves as dangerous (at least potentially) their fear decreases. They develop more self-respect. Then, perhaps begin to resist oppression. 
Maybe you are a loser- or maybe not. Maybe you just have a bad habit. Maybe a series of bad habits. Circumstances change, and so can you. Positive feedback loops, adding effect to effect, can work with pareto’s law or matthew’s law – which like compound interest- prove that those who start to have will probably get more.
Standing up straight with your shoulders back is not smething that is only physical, because you’re not only a body. You’re a spirit, so to speak- a psyche- as well. Standing up physically also implies and invokes and demands standing up metaphysically. Standing up means voluntarily accepting the burden of being. Your nervous system responds in an entirely different manner when you face the demands of life voluntarily. You respond for a challenge, instead of bracing for catastrophe. 
<br>
<h2>RULE 2 / Treat yourself like someone you are responsible for helping</h2>
“The consequence of the Garden of Eden fiasco was that humans attained self-consciousness. Therefore, we developed shame and wanted to hide our naked bodies. We also developed a sense of morality so we hid from God. J.P asks: so why would someone buy prescription medication for his dog, and then so carefully administer it, when he would not do the same for himself? The answer is derived from one of the foundational texts of mankind: why should anyone take care of anything as naked, ugly, ashamed, frightened, worthless, cowardly, resentful, defensive, and accusatory as a descendent of Adam. Even if that being is himself?” 
“ No one is more familirar than you with all the ways your mind and body are flawed. No one has more reason to hold you in contempt, to see you as pathetic- and by withholding something that might do you good. A dog, is clearly more deserving… If we wish to take care of ourselves properly, we would have to respect ourselves- but we don’t, because we are- not least in our own eyes- fallen creatures.
But another problem has arisen. It is wasy to believe that people are arrogant, and egotistical, and always out for themselves. The cynicism that makes that opinion a universal truism is widespread and fashionable. But such an orientation in the world is not at all characteristic of many people. They have the opposite problem: they shoulder intolerable burdens of self-disgust, self-contempt, shame, and consciousness. Thus, instead of narcissistically inflating their own importance, they don’t value themselves at all.
The saying ‘do unto others as you would have them do unto you’ or ‘loving your neighbour as yourself’ . First that the statement has nothing to do with being nice. Second, that these are equations, rather than injunctions… This sort of everyday heroism is the rule, rather than the exception. Most individuals are dealing with one or more serious health problems while going on productively and uncomplainingly about their business. If anyone is fortunate enough to be in a rare period of grace and health, personally, then he or she typically has at least on close family member in crisis. Yet people prevail and continue to do difficult and effortful tasks to hold themselves and their families and societies together. This is miraculous. It is always wounded people who are holding it together… Some people degenerate into hell of resentment and hatred of being, but most refuse to do so, despite their suffering, and disappointments and losses and inadequacies and ugliness, and again this is a miracle for those with the eyes to se it.
We deserve some respect, you deserve some respect. You are important to other people, as much as to yourself. You have some vital role to play in the unfolding destiny of the world.  You are, therefore, morally obliged to take care of yourself. You should take care of, help and be good to yourself, the same way you would take care of, help and be good to someone you loved and valued. You may have to conduct yourself habitually in a manner that allows you some respect for your own being- and fair enough. But every person is deeply flawed. Everyone falls short of the glory of God. If that stark fact meant, however, that we had no responsibility to take care of ourselves as much as others, everyone would be brutally punished all the time. 
To treat yourself as if you were someone you are responsible for helping is, instead, to consider what would be truly good for you. This is not ‘what do you want’. It is also not ‘ what would make you happy.’ Every time you give a child something sweet you make that child happy. But ‘happy’ not synonymous with ‘good’. You must get children to brush their teeth. To dress warm. You want a child to become virtuous, responsible, healthy, and able to take care of himself and others- and thrive while doing so. So why would you think it is acceptable to do any less for yourself?
You need to consider the future and think, ‘what might my life look like if I were caring for myself properly? What career would challenge me and render me productive and helpful, so that I could shoulder my share of the load, and enjoy the consequences? What should I be doing when I have some free time, to improve my health, expand my knowledge, and strengthen my body?’ You need to know where you are, so you can start to chart your course. You need to know who you are, so you can understand your arnament and bolster yourself in respect to your limitations. You need to know where you are going, so that you can limit the extent of chaos in your life, restructure order, and bring the divine force of hope to bear on the world. You must determine where you are going so that you can bargain for yourself and so you don’t end up resentful, vengeful, and creul. You have to articulate your own principles so that you can defend yourself against others taking innapropriate advantage of you, and so that you are safe and secure while you play.”
<br>
<h2>RULE 3 / Make friends with people who want the best for you</h2>
<br>
J.P tells the story of his upbringing in a small town in Northern Alberta. Some of his friends made it out succesffully and some did not.
“Sometimes when people have a low opinion of their worth- or, perhaps, when they refuse responsibility for their lives- they choose a new acquaintance, of precisely the type who proved to be troublesome in the past. Such people don’t believe that they deserve any better- so they don’t go looking for it. Or perhaps they don’t want to. Freud calls this a ‘repetition compulsion’. He thought of it as an unconscious drive to repeat the horrors of the past- sometimes, perhaps, to formulate those horrors more precisely, sometime to attempt more active mastery. 
In regards to ‘rescuing the damned’ “people choose friends who aren’t good or them for other reasons, too. Sometimes it is because they want to rescue someone. The highest virtue is the desire to help. But not everyone who is failing is a victim, and not everyone at the bottom wishes to rise. Nonetheless, people will often accept or even amplify their own suffering as well as that of others, if they can brandish It as evidence of the world’s injustice…. When it is not just naivete, the attempt to rescue someone is often fuelled by vanity and narcissism. 
J.P goes on to say that not everyone is in a position to help. Only Christ was perfect and able to help the poor and the prostitutes. How do you know, that your attempt to pull someone up won’t instead bring them down? In the literature, a team member who proves to be a burden on the entire team actually degenerates the work of the entire team…. Assume first that you are doing the easiest thing and not the most difficult thing. 
Before you help someone, you should find out why that person is in trouble. You should not merely assume that he or she is a noble victim of unjust circumstances and exploitation. It is the most unlikely explanation, not the most probable. Besides, if you buy the story that everything terrible just happened on its own with no personal responsibility then you deny that person all agency in the past (and by implication, in the present and the future, as well). In this manner you strip him of all his power. It is far more likely that a given individual has rejected the path upwards, because of its difficulty. Failure is easy to understand. Avoiding to shoulder burdens? Success: that’s a mystery. Virtue: That’s what is inexplicable.  
Or maybe you have no plan to rescue anybody. You’re associating with people who are bad for you not because it’s better for anyone, but because it’s easier. You’ve all decided to sacrifice the future to the present. But you don’t talk about it. It is an implicit contract. 
Someone who belives they are a ‘good person’ may actually just try to look good pretending to solve what appears to be a difficult problem instead of actually being good and addressing something real. Maybe instead of continuing some friendships you should go off somewhere, get your act together, and lead by example. 
You should choose to be friends with people who want the best for you. And vice versa. If you surround yourself with people who  support your upward aim, they will not tolerate your cynicism and destructiveness. They will instead encourage you hen you do good for yourself, and punish you when you do not.  There are many people who do the opposite of this.
<br> 
<h2>RULE 4 / Compare yourself to who you were yesterday, not to who someone else is today</h2>
<br>
“When we are very young we are neither individual nor informed. We have not had the time nor gained the wisdom to develop our own standards. In consequence, we must compare ourselves to others, because standards are necessary (I even told dr. Cho I compare myself to others as ‘benchmarks’ of what is normal). As we mature we become by contrast, increasingly individual and unique. The conditions of our lives become more and more personal and less and less comparele with those of others.”
“You cannot expect to be winning at all the games you are playing. Perhaps you object, and think ‘I should be winning at everything!’ But consider that if you are winning at everything may mean that you are not trying new difficult things and therefore not growing, and growing may be the most important form of winning. Consider that many of the games you are playing are so unique to you, so individual, that comparison to others is simply inappropriate. Perhaps you are overvaluing what you don’t have and undervaluing what you do have”
Remember that Plato’s definition of ‘good’ is not synonymous to obedience. ‘Good’ must have a positive trajectory.  A person capable of obedience is at least- a well forged tool. There must be a vision, beyond discicipline and obedience. A tool still needs a purpose. Therefore, J.P says “date to be dangerous, dare to be truthful, dare to articulate yourself and and express what would really justify your life. We  are able to envision things that aren’t there. We can envision new ways that things could be better. The disadvantage to all this foresight and creativity is chronic unease and discomfort. So how can we benefit from our imagination? First, you must take stock of who you are. Like when you buy a house you pay an inspector to tell you all the faults with the house so you know what to fix. You can’t fix what you don’t know is broken- and you are broken. You can make great utility of your inner critic. Think of the past as an indicator of what the future may be- except the future has yet to happen so you have control over that. Aim to make your life a tiny bit better with new habits and routine. Do this for three years consistently and that is compound interest for you. 
“Religion concerns iteslef with the domain of values… religion is about proper behaviour plato called ‘the good’. “It is necessary and desirable for religions to have a dogmatic element. What good is a value system that does not provide a stable structure? What food is a value system that does not point to a higher order? And what good can you possibly be if you cannot internalize that structure, or accept that order. Without that, you are nothing but an adult two-year old without the charm or potential.”
“ Faith is not the childish belief in magic. That is ignorance or even wilful blindness. It is instead the realization that the tragic irrationalities of life must be counterbalanced by an equally irrational commitment to the essential goodness of being. It is simultaneously the will to dare set your sight at the unachievable, and to sacrifice everything, including your life. You realize that you have nothing better to do. But how can you do all this?- assuming you are foolish enough to try. You might start by not thinking- or, more accurately, but less trenchantely, by refusing to subjugate your faith to your current rationality, and its narrowness of view. This doesn’t mean make yourself stupid. It means the opposite. It means instead, you must quit calculating and maneuvering, scheming and conniving. Put your old strategies aside and pay attention.
Paying attention: Examine your life. Is there anything that is bothering you? Anything that needs to be done? You may find that you have fear for tackling such large projects. But just start with the bare minimum, and you will find that the whole project, and every project is made of parts. This is also what J.P calls ‘telling the truth’. 
 “Instead of playing the tyrant to yourself, you are paying attention. You are telling the truth, instead of manipulating the world. You are negotiating, instead of playing the martyr or the tyrant. You no longer have to be envious, because you no longer know that someone else truly has it better. You no longer have to be frustrated, because you have learned to aim low, and to be patient. You are discovering who you are, and what you want, and what you are willing to do. You are finding that the solutions to your particular problems have to be tailored to you personally and precisely. You are now less concerned with the actions of other people, because you have plenty to do for yourself. Compare yourself to who you were yesterday and not to who someone else is today.”
<h2>RULE 5 / Do not let your children do anything that makes you dislike them</h2>
<p>**Section Needs Updating**</p>
<br>
<h2>RULE 6 / Set your house in perfect order before you criticize the world</h2>
Life can be cruel. However, when we experience pain we can take our hatred to such heights as having resentment to all of mankind and god himself and become not just self-destructive but also cause harm to others. The desire for vengeance is however justified but bars the way to other productive thoughts. In one reading a troubled individual hopes that all of her suffering is her own fault and not god’s. Because if her suffering is her own fault then at least she can conclude that she might be able to do something about it. If it is God’s fault, well then, reality itself is flawed- hell bent on ensuring misery. 
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn had every reason to question the structure of existence when he was imprisoned in a soviet labour camp. But the great writer did not allow his mind to turn towards vengeance and destruction. He later wrote The Gulag Archipelago, a history of the soviet prison camps. This book was responsible for the demolishing the intellectual credibility of communism, as ideology or society….One’s man decision to change his life, instead of cursing fate, shook the whole world pathological system of communist tyranny to its core.
If you are suffering, well that is the norm. People are limited and life is tragic. If you are suffering unbrearably and you are starting to become corrupt here is something to think about:
      Clean Up Your Life: Consider your circumstances. Start small. Have you taken full advantage of the opportunities offered to you? Are you working hard on your career, or even your job, or are you letting bitterness and resentment hold you back and drag you down? Have you made peace with your brother? Are you treating your spouse and your children with dignity and respect? Do you have habits that are destroying your health and well-being? Are you truly shouldering your responsibilities? Have you said what you need to say to your friends and family members? Are there things that you could do, that you know you could do, that would make things better around you? 
     Have you cleaned up your life? If the answer is no, here is something to try: start to stop doing what you know to be wrong. Start stopping today. Don’t waste your time questioning how you know that what you are doing is wrong, if you are certain that It is. Inopportune questioning can confuse, without enlightening, as well as deflecting from action. You can know that something is wrong or right without knowing why. Your entire being can tell you something that you can neither explain nor articulate. Every person is too complex to know themselves completely, and we all contain wisdom that we cannot comprehend….Don’t blame capitalism, or the radical left. Don’t try to change others or re-order the state. Have some humility. Set your house in perfect order before you criticize the world.
<br>
<h2>RULE 7 / Pursue what is meaningful (not what is expedient)</h2>
<br>
Here is a productive model: the future is a judgmental father. But there is an additional archetypal foundation: which is sacrifice now, to gain later.
J.P asks: but what must be sacrificed? And if not all sacrifices are equal and not all sacrifices are rewarded with a better future than what should be sacrificed? 
“The realization that pleasure could be forestalled dawned on us with great difficulty. It runs absolutely contrary to our ancient, fundamental animal instincts, which demand immediate satisfaction. And, to complicate the matter, such delay only becomes useful when civilization has stabalized itself enough to guarantee the existence of the delayed reward of the future. If everything you save gets destroyed, or worse, stolen, there is no point in saving. So how was it that those two impossible and necessarily simultaneous accomplishments (delay and the stabalization of society into the future) could have possibily manifested themselves?
	Here is a developmental progression, from animal to human. After a kill there is some left-over for later. Early humans couldn’t store food so they would share it and think ‘maybe when I have no food, and they get some, then they will share with me’. This is the emergence of the ‘social contract’. 
So J.P returns to the question: we know that the difference between the successful and unssuccesful is sacrifice. But what is the greatest possible sacrifice? The answer becomes deep and profound. God may demand not only sacrifice, but the sacrifice of precisely what is loved best. When Abraham cannot bear a child due to old age but then miracuolsly gives birth to Isaac God then asks Abraham to sacrifice Isaac. But why? Because sometimes, when things are not going well its not the world that is the cause. The cause is instead that which is currently most valued, subjectively and personally…If the world you are seeing is not the world that you want, then it is time to examine your values. It’s time to rid yourself of the pre-suppositions. It is time to let go. It might even be time to sacrifice what you love bet so that you can become who you might become, instead of staying who you are.” 
Something valuable given up ensures future prosperity. Something valuable, sacrified, pleases the lord. What is most valuable, and best sacrificed?- A choice cut of meat? It’s a close race between a child and self. The sacrifice of the mother, offering her child to the world, is exemplified profoundly by Michelangelo’s great sculpture, The pieta. Mary’s son Christ, offers himself to God and to the world and is betrayed and murdered. This is the archetypal story of the man who gives all for the sake of the better- who offers up his life for the advancement of being- who allows god’s will to become manifest fully within the confines within a single, mortal life. That is the model of the honourable man. In christ’s case- as he sacrifices himself- God, his father, is simultaneously sacrificing his son. It is for this reason that the Christain sacrificial drama of son and the self is archetypal. 
Consider once again, the story of Adam and Eve. Life becomes very hard for their children (that’s us) after the fall and awakening of our archetypal parents. First is the consciousness of the future, which we must prepare for, and thus must sacrifice the pleasures of today for the sake of a better tomorrow. But also, the realization of mortality and the necessity of work is not the only revelation to Adam and Eve when they eat the forbidden fruit, they were also granted (or cursed by) the knowledge of good and evil. (‘it took me decades to understand what this meant) It’s this: once you become consciously aware that you, yourself are vulnerable, you understand the nature of human vulnerability, in general. You understand what is like to be fearful, and angry, and resentful and bitter. You understand what pain means. And once you truly understand such feelings in yourself, and how they are produced, you understand how to produce them in others. It is in this manner that the self-conscious beings that we are become voluntarily and exquisetly capable of tormenting others. We see the consequence of this new knowledge manifest itself in the story of Cain and Abel. Where Cain murders his brother just to spite god. 
Thus, the central problem of life- the dealing with its brute facts- is not merely what and how to sacrifice to diminish suffering, but what and how to sacrifice to diminish suffering and evil – the conscious and voluntary and vengeful source of the worse suffering. 
“No tree can grow to heaven, unless its roots reach down to hell” quoted by carl Jung. J.P then tells the story of Christ meeting Satan in the dessert with three temptations: by telling Christ to turn the rocks into bread, then to throw himself off a cliff to be saved by God (deus ex-machina), and finally, that if Christ is connected to God to request that he be saved. Satan embodies the refusal of sacrifice, he is arrogance, incarnate, spite, deceit. He is pure malevolence. He will not humble himself. He is full of desire for destruction and does it deliberately. There is a poweful call to being in this story. To obtain te greatest possible prize- the establishment of the kingdom of God on Earth, the resurrection of paradise- the individual must conduct his or her life in a manner that requires the rejection of immediate gratification, of natural and perverse desires alike, no matter how powerfully and convincingly and realistically those are offered, and dispense, as well the temptations of evil. Evil amplifies the catastrophe of life, increasing dramatically the motivation for expediency already there because of the essential tragedy of being.
The solution: aim high. Pay attention. Fix what you can. Don’t be arrogant in your knowledge. Become aware of your resentments, hatred, malevolence. Consider the murderousness of your own spirit before you dare accuse others, and before you attempt to repair the fabric of the world. Maybe it is not the world that’s at fault. It’s you. Expedience is the following of blind impulse. It’s short-term gain. It’s narrow, and selfish. It lies to get its way. It takes nothing it account. Meaning is the mature replacement. Meaning emerges when impulses are regulated, organized, and unified. You may find that if you attend to these moral obligations, you have placed ‘make the world a better place’ at the top of your value hierarchy, you experience ever-deepening meaning. It’s not bliss. It’s not happiness. It is something more like atonement for the criminal fact of your fractured and damaged being. It’s payment of the debt you owe for the insane and horrible miracle of your existence. It’s how you remember the holocaust. It’s how you make amends for the pathology of history. (he then goes into great deatail of how finding meaning is to find harmony and balance)- do what is meaningful, not what is expedient. 

<h2>RULE 8 / Tell the truth—or, at least, don’t lie</h2>
You can use words to manipulate the world into delivering what you want. It is the speech people engage in when they attempt to influence and manipulate others. It’s what university students do when they write an essay to please the professor, instead of articulating and clarifying their own ideas. To conduct life like this is to become possessed by some ill-formed desire, and then to craft speech and action in a manner that appears likely, rationally, to bring about that end. Typical calculated ends might include ‘to impose my ideological beliefs to prove that I am right’ or to ‘appear competent’, ‘move myself up the dominance hierarchy’ , ‘to avoid responsibility’, ‘to ensure everyone likes me’, ‘to rationalize my anti-social outlook’, ‘to capatalize on my vulnerability’. These are what Alfred-Adler called ‘Life-Lies’. Someone living a life-lie is attempting to manipulate reality with perception, thought and action, so that only some narrowly desired and pre-defined outcome is allowed to exist. 
Consider the person who insists that everything is right in her life. She avoids conflict, smiles, and does what she is asked to do. She finds a niche and hides it. She does not question authority or put her own ideas foreward, and does not complain when mistreated. But her obedience and self-obliteration eliminates all the meaning from her life. 
If you say ‘no’ to your boss, or your spouse, or your mother, when it needs to be said, then you transform yourself into someone who can say ‘no’ when it needs to be said. If you say ‘yes’ when ‘no’ needs to be said, however, you can transform yourself into someone who can only say ‘yes’, even when it is very clearly time to say ‘no’. If you ever wonder how perfectly ordinary, decent people can find themselves doing the terrible things the gulag camp guard did, now you have your answer. By the time no seriously needed to be said, there was no one left capable of saying it. 
Kierkegaard conceives this mode of being as ‘inauthentic’. An Inauthentic person continues to perceive and act in ways his own experience has demonstrated false. He does not speak with his own voice. ‘Did what I want happen? No. Then my aim or my methods were wrong. I still have something to learn” This is the voice of the authentic.
“Did what I want happen? No. Then the world is unfair.” This is the voice of inauthenticity. 
The prideful, rational-mind, comfortable with its certainty, enamoured of its own brilliance, is easily tempted to ignore error, and to sweep dirt under the rug. Another example is the inability of a son to thrive independently when exploited by a mother bent on shielding her son from all disappointment and pain. He never leaves, and she is never lonely. It is an evil conspiracy. He broods in the basement, imagining himself to be oppressed. He feels rejected from life for his cowardice, awkawardness, and inability. 
The Truth Instead: what would happen if, instead we decided to stop lying? What does this even mean? We are limited in our knowledge after all. We must make decisions, here and now, even with the best means and the best goals can never be discerned with certainty. An aim, an ambition, provides the structure necessary for action. An aim provides a destination, a point of contrast against the present, and a framework, within which all things can be evaluated. AN aim defines progress and makes such progress exciting. An aim reduces anxiety, because if you have no aim everything can mean anything or nothing, and neither of those two options makes for a tranquil spirit. Thus, we have to think, and plan, and limit, and posit, in order to live at all. 
Set your ambitions, even if you are uncertain about what they should be. The better ambitions you have to do with the development of character and ability, rather than status and power. Status you can lose. You carry character with you wherever you go, and allows you to prevail against adversity. Knowing this, tie a rope to a boulder. Pick up the great stone, and heave it in front of you, and pull yourself towards it. Watch and observe while you move foreward. Articulate your experience as clearly and carefully to yourself and others as you possibly can. In this manner, you will learn to proceed more effectively and efficiently towards your goals…. This is ‘the act of faith’ whose necessity was insisted upon by Kierkegaard. You cannot know ahead of time. Even a good example is insufficient for proof, given the difference between individuals. The success of a good example can always be attributed to luck. Thus, you have to risk your particular, individual life to find out. It is not an act of submission, but an act of courage. 
<br>
<h2>RULE 9 / Assume that the person you are listening to might know something you don’t</h2>
<br>
Psychotherapy is not advice. Psychotherapy is a genuine conversation of exploration, articulation, and strategizing. When you are engaged in a conversation you are primarily listening. This chapter is short and the title speaks for itself. Become informed, allow for the words of the other person to rattle your foundation of knowledge so you can rebuild even stronger with greater wisdom.
In ‘Psychology today’ February 2018 edition ’10 rules for reinvention’: “ participants were asked to rate themselves on each of the big-five-personality factors. Subjects were then to write a brief essay each week envisioning what their changed selves would look like, and made small goals each week to help them attain their desired changes. After 16 weeks those who wrote about goals (compared to those who did not) made significant personality changes and reported gradual changes in their behavior that corresponds with the changes they wanted to make. 
    Helping participants to set small, attainable, goals that align their thoughts, feelings, and behaviours with the desired traits facilitated change…. The trouble is that the goals people create are too vauge like ‘be more social’ which actually undermines motivation. Daily checklists of highly specific behaviours are particularly helpful. 
     Experience and roles ‘serve as consistent presses for new patterns of thoughts, feelings, and behaviours’ and they promote the adoption of new identities. It is the modified sense of selfand the new patterns of thoughts, feelings, and behaviour in and of themselves that eventually crystalize into enduring trait change. 
<h2>RULE 10 / Be precise in your speech</h2>
<br>
When we look at the world, we perceive only what is enough for our plans and actions to work and for us to get by…it is for this reason that we must be precise in our aim because we are only able to take into account the things that are immediate to us because our minds cannot comprehend all the complexity in the world all the time all at once. Absent of having an aim, we drown in the complexity of the world. 
Why refuse to specify? Because while you are failing to define success (and thereby rendering it impossible) you are refusing to define failure, to yourself, so that when you fail you won’t notice, and it won’t hurt. This will instead cause you to carry a continual sense of disappointment in your own being and the self-contempt that comes along with that and the increasing hatred for the world. 
Consider as well, that you may be blocked in your progress not because you lack opportunity, but because you have been too arrogant to make full use of what already lies in front of you. (This also ties into rule 6: set your house in perfect order). ( even if things are not in utility right in front of you there lay many opportunities to open up more doors- J.P gives an example of a guy with social anxiety who lived at home who moved away to a big city and got a dishwashing job in order to break out of his shell and improve his life). 

So you must think: what is wrong exactly? What do I want exactly? You must speak forthrightly and call forth the habitable world from chaos. You must use honest precise speech to do that. If instead you shrink away and hide, what you are hiding If instead you shrink away and hide, what you are hiding from will transorm itself into the giant dragon that lurks under your bed and in your forest and in the dark recesses of your mind- and it will devour you. 
    You must determine where you have been in your life, so that you can know where you are now. If you don’t know where you are precisely, then you could be anywhere. Anywhere is too many places to be, and some of those places are very bad. You must determine where you have been in your life, because otherwise you can’t get to where you are going. You cannot get from point A to point B unless you are already at point A, and if you are just ‘anywhere’ the chances you are at point A are very small indeed. 
     You must determine where you are going in your life, because you cannot get there unless you move in that direction. Random wandering will not move you foreward. It will instead disappoint and frustrate you and make you anxious and unhappy and hard to get along with (and then resentful, and then vengeful, and then worse).
     Say what you mean, so that you can find out what you mean. Act out what you say, so that you can find out what happens. Then pay attention. Note your errors. Articulate them. Strive to correct them. That is how you discover the meaning of your life. That will protect you from the tragedy of your life.
     Confront the chaos of being. Take aim against a sea of troubles. Specify your destination, and chart your course. Admit to what you want. Tell those around you who you are. Narrow, and gaze attentively, and move foreward, forthrightly. Be precise in your speech. 

<h2>RULE 11 / Do not bother children when they are skateboarding</h2>
<br>
Boys are suffering in the modern world. They are more disobedient- negatively- or more independent- positively than girls, and they suffer for this. Throught their pre-university educational career. They are less agreeable (agreeableness being a trait associated with compassion, empathy, and avoidance of conflict) and less susceptible to anxiety and depression, at least after both sexes hit puberty. Boys’ interests tilt towards thing; girls’ interests tilt towards people. 
Girls can win by winning in their own hierarchy- by being good at what girls value, as girls. They can add to this victory by winning in the boy’s hierarchy. Boys however can only win by winning in the male hirerarchy, They will lose status, among girls and boys, by being good at what girls value… 
It has been suggested that ‘boys should be socialized like girls’ to develop socially positive qualities such as tenderness, sensitivity, to feelings, nurturance, cooporative and aesthetic appreciation… Agreeable, compassionate, empathetic, conflict-averse (all those traits grouped together) let people walk on them, and they get bitter. They sacrifice themselves for others, sometimes excessively, and cannot comprehend why it is not reciprocated. Agreeable people are compliant, and this robs them of their independence. The danger of this can be amplified when associated by high trait neuroticism… it would be lovely if the opposite of a criminal was a saint- but this is not the case. The opposite of a criminal is an oedipal mother, which is its own type of criminal. 
The terrible mother is an ancient symbol. It is the spirit of careless unconsciousness, tempting the ever-striving spirit of awareness and enlightenment down into the protective womb-like-embrace of the underworld. Nothing inspires self consciousness, undermines courage, and fosters feeling of nihilism and hared more than the too-tight embrace of the too-caring mom. 

Relationship Advice
The women at female-dominated institutes of higher education are finding it increasingly difficult to arrange a dating relationship of even moderate duration. In consequence they must ‘settle’ for a fling at the least. A stable loving relationship is highly desirable, for men as well as women. For women, however it is often most wanted (whereas now 27 Vs 8 percent of females) for men who say they do not ever want to marry. 
Girls aren’t attracted to boys who are their friend, even though they might like them, whatever that means. 
Data indicates that a spouse with a desirable job is a high priority for almost 80 percent of never-married but marriage-seeking women (but less than 50 percent for men). The increasingly short supply for university-educated men poses a problem of increasing severity for women who want to marry, as well as date. Women have a strong proclivity to marry across or up the economic dominance hierarchy. They prefer a partner with equal or greater status. (although the vulnerability factor of raising children justifies this).
The famous ad called ‘the insult that made a man out of mac’ where the protagnost is sitting on a beach blanket with an attractive girl get sand kicked in his face by a bully but doesn’t fight back because the bully is much larger than him. Mac says ‘I’ll get him someday’ to which the girls responds ‘don’t let it bother you little boy’. Mac then works out and punches the bully and the now admiring girl clings to Mac’s arm and says ‘oh mac you are a real man after-all’. 
      This ad is famous for a reason. It summarizes human sexual psychology in a few panels. Instead of the put down small boy sulking off to play video games, he presents what Alfred Adler called ‘compensatory fantasy’. The goal of such a fantasy is not so much wish-fulfillment, as illumination of a genuine path foreward. Mac identifies the part of himself that could transcend his current state, and become the hero of his own adventure. Mac punches the bully in the face. Mac wins. So does his girlfriend, and so does everyone else. 
It is to women’s advantage that men do not happily put up with a dependency among themselves. Part of the reason why a woman does not want a low-paid man to look after as he struggles for employment… It is for this reason that Nelson Muntz of the simpsons is so necessary to the small social group that surrounds the anti-hero bart. Without nelson, king of bullies, the school would be run by touchy milhouses, intellectual martin princes, chocolate gorging german children, infantile Ralph Wiggums. Muntz is a corrective, tough, self-sufficient kid who uses his own capacity for contempt to decide what line of immature and pathetic behaviour simply cannot be crossed. 
When softness and harmlessness become the only consciously acceptable virtues, then hardness and dominance will start to exert an unconscious fascination. Partly, when men are pushed too hard to feminize, they will become more interested in the harsh fascist political ideology (such as the story told in ‘fight club’). 
<p>Men have to toughen up. Men demand it, and women want it, even if they may not approve of the harsh and contemptuous attitude that is part and parcel of the socially demanding process that fosters and enforces toughness…. Men toughen up by pushing themselves, and pushing each other.. And if you think tough men are dangerous, wait until you see what weak men are capable of. </p>

<p>The situation in the universities is far more problematic if you eliminate the so-called STEM programs (exluding psychology), the female/male ratio Is skewed with 80 percent of those majoring in those fields of healthcare, public admin, psych, and education which comprises one-quarter of all degrees, are female.</p>

<h2>RULE 12 / Pet a cat when you encounter one on the street</h2>
<p>Dogs are allies of humans. They are social, hierarchial, and domesticated. They pay for the attention they receive with loyalty, admiration, and love. Cats however, are their own creatures. They aren’t social or hierarchical. They are only semi-domesticated. They don’t do tricks. They are friendly on their own terms. Dogs have been tamed but cats make their own decision. When you interact with a cat it may scratch you or hiss at you, but if you are lucky it may rub against your leg, and fall on its back wanting to be petted. If you pay attention, even on a bad day, you may be fortunate enough to be confronted with a small opportunity of such a sort. Things can come along that may steal just 10 minutes of your time that allow you to do something ridiculous that distracts you or reminds you that you can laugh at the absurdity of existence. Maybe when nothing is going right, and your head is spinning, a cat may appear and you will get a reminder that just the 15 seconds of wonder makes up for the ineradicable suffering that accompanies life. </p>
